.\" ** You probably do not want to edit this file directly **
.\" It was generated using the DocBook XSL Stylesheets (version 1.69.1).
.\" Instead of manually editing it, you probably should edit the DocBook XML
.\" source for it and then use the DocBook XSL Stylesheets to regenerate it.
.TH "ATIEVENTSD" "8" "05/05/2006" "" ""
.\" disable hyphenation
.nh
.\" disable justification (adjust text to left margin only)
.ad l
.SH "NAME"
atieventsd \- ATI external events daemon
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.HP 11
\fBatieventsd\fR [\-a\ \fISOCKET\fR] [\-d] [\-h] [\-l\ \fIFILE\fR] [\-m\ \fIFILE\fR] [\-\-nodaemon] [\-\-nosyslog] [\-s\ \fISOCKET\fR] [\-x\ \fISCRIPT\fR]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
The ATI External Events Daemon
\fBatieventsd\fR
is a user\-level application that monitors various system events such as ACPI or hotplug, then notifies the driver via the X extensions interface that the event has occured.
.PP
By default,
\fBatieventsd\fR
prints out logging information to the
\fBsyslogd\fR(8)
daemon facility unless
\-\-nosyslog
is specified. The daemon is shut down by sending a SIGTERM to the daemon process, for example, by
\fBkillall atieventsd\fR. The various options are used to control daemon behaviour and are explained below.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
\fB\-a \fR\fB\fISOCKET\fR\fR, \fB\-\-acpidsocket=\fR\fB\fISOCKET\fR\fR
Connect to
\fBacpid\fR(8)
socket located at
\fISOCKET\fR
instead of at the default location
\fI/var/run/acpid.socket\fR.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-debug\fR
Output additional debugging information to the log.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Show a brief help message and exit.
.TP
\fB\-l \fR\fB\fIFILE\fR\fR, \fB\-\-logfile=\fR\fB\fIFILE\fR\fR
Output logging information to
\fIFILE\fR. This output is independent of syslog output thus logging to both
\fBsyslogd\fR(8)
and this file is possible.
.TP
\fB\-\-nodaemon\fR
Run atieventsd in the foreground instead of running as a daemon.
.TP
\fB\-\-nosyslog\fR
Do not output log messages to
\fBsyslogd\fR(8). Normally used in conjunction with
\-\-logfile
above to redirect the daemon logging information.
.TP
\fB\-s \fR\fB\fISOCKET\fR\fR, \fB\-\-socket=\fR\fB\fISOCKET\fR\fR
Create atieventsd socket at
\fISOCKET\fR
instead of at
\fI/var/run/atieventsd.socket\fR. This socket is used by
\fBaticonfig\fR(1)
to send specific events to atieventsd.
.TP
\fB\-x \fR\fB\fISCRIPT\fR\fR, \fB\-\-xauthscript=\fR\fB\fISCRIPT\fR\fR
Use X authorization script at
\fISCRIPT\fR
instead of at
\fI/etc/ati/authatieventsd.sh\fR. This script is used by atieventsd to be granted authorization access to the X server display. See the section below on the X authorization script for further details.
.SH "DAEMON POLICIES"
.PP
The daemon policies can be adjusted by
\fBaticonfig\fR(1)
with the use of the
\fB\-\-set\-policy=\fR\fB\fISTRING\fR\fR
option to that command tool, where
\fISTRING\fR
can be one of the following values.
.TP
\fBhandle_lid\fR
Enable monitoring of laptop lid open/close events.
.TP
\fBignore_lid\fR
Do not monitor of laptop lid open/close events.
.SH "X AUTHORIZATION SCRIPT"
.PP
The X authorization script provides a distro\-neutral way for the daemon to gain access to the necessary X server display in order to send it commands. The script is located at
\fI/etc/ati/authatieventsd.sh\fR
unless overridden by the use of the
\-\-xauthscript
keyword above. The script takes three parameters:
.PP
The first parameter is either the keyword "grant" to grant access or "revoke" to revoke access.
.PP
The second parameter is the display number that the daemon is trying to get authorization for, e.g., ":0".
.PP
The third parameter is the name of the X authorization file that the daemon is using, as obtained from
\fBXauFileName\fR(3x). This file is where the authorization needs to be given. Note that this parameter only makes sense if
\fBxauth\fR(1)
is being used. If another mechanism such as
\fBxhost\fR(1)
is being used it can be ignored. If no form of authorization is being done, the script can simply return 0 and the daemon will assume that it is always authorized.
.PP
The return code from the script should be zero if authorization was successfully granted or revoked, and nonzero if an error occurred.
.SH "AUTHOR"
.PP
ATI Technologies Inc.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
.PP
Please go to http://support.ati.com to report any bugs.
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
.PP
Copyright (c) 2006 ATI Technologies Inc. There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
\fBaticonfig\fR(1),
\fBacpid\fR(8),
\fBsyslogd\fR(8),
\fBxauth\fR(1),
\fBxhost\fR(1)
