* NEWS -- What's new in the m17n library.			-*- outline -*-
Copyright (C) 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
  National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
  Registration Number H15PRO112
See the end for copying conditions.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.5.5

** Now libtool 2.2.4 or the later is required to build the library
from CVS source.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.5.4

** New coding system names "Shift_JIS" and "windows-XXXX" are
recognized.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.5.3

This release is just for bug fixing.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.5.2

This release is just for bug fixing.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.5.1

This release is just for bug fixing.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.5.0

** New API layer FLT is created.

** New environment variable MDEBUG_FLT is available to turn on
printing debug information for FLT, and these are now obsolete;
MDEBUG_FONT_FLT, MDEBUG_FONT_OTF.

** New functions mchartable_min_char () returns the mininum character.
that is set some value in a char-table.  New funcion
mchartable_min_char () is for the maximum character.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.4.0

** If the environment variable "M17NDIR" is not set, the directory
"~/.m17n.d" is serched for database files.

** New function mfont_list_family_names () returns a list of available
font family names.

** New functions mlanguage_list (), mlanguage_code (),
mlanguage_name_list (), and mlanguage_text () return various
language-related information.

** New functions mscript_list () and mscript_language_list () return
various script-related information.

** New function msymbol_put_func (), msymbol_get_func (),
mplist_put_func (), mplist_get_func (), mface_put_hook (), and
mface_get_hook () are available to avoid unsafe casting of function
pointer.  New macro M17N_FUNC and new type M17NFunc are also
introduced.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.3.0

** The `configure' script accepts the argument "--without-gui" to
suppress building GUI libraries.

** The environment variable MDEBUG_OUTPUT_FILE can specify a file to
output the debugging log messages.

** The member `candidate_changed' of MInputContext carries more
information; i.e. the list itself is changed, only an index is
changed, etc.

** The member `callback_list' of MInputDriver can have callback
functions `input-get-surrounding-text' and
`input-delete-surrounding-text'.

** The minput_filter () function accepts special events
`input-focus-move', `input-focus-in', and `input-focus-out'.

** Three letter codes of ISO639-2 are also accepted as language
symbols.

** New functions minput_get_description (), minput_get_commands (),
minput_assign_command_keys (), minput_get_variables (), and
minput_set_variable(), minput_get_title_icon() are introduced for
handling input methods.

** New fucntions mtext_insert () and and mtext_replace () for
modifying M-text.

** New functions mtext_uppercase (), mtext_titlecase (),
mtext_lowercase () implement "3.13 Default Case Operations" of The
Unicode Standard 4.0.

** New function mtext_line_break () implements the line breaking
algorithm of The Unicode Standard 4.0 UAX#14.  The algorithm can be
controlled by the variable mdraw_line_break_option.

** New function msymbol_is_managing_key () checks if a symbol is a
managing key or not.

** New function mtext_data () exports various information about
M-text.

** Function mfont_get_prop () accept properties `fontfile',
`font-acsent', `font-descent', and `max-advance'.

** New function mfont_check () checks if a specific font can be used
for a specific script and language.

** New function mface_equal () checks if two faces are equal or not.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.2.0

** Two new variables MTEXT_FORMAT_UTF_16 and MTEXT_FORMAT_UTF_32.
They are initialized to one of MTEXT_FORMAT_UTF_16LE,
MTEXT_FORMAT_UTF_16BE,  MTEXT_FORMAT_UTF_LE,  MTEXT_FORMAT_UTF_32BE
dependending on the systems's endianess.

** In the argument PLIST of mframe (), the key Mfont can be used to
specify which font-backend to use.  The value must be Mx or Mfreetype.

** New function mfont_list () returns a list of matching fonts.

** New function m17n_status () returns the current initialization
status.

** New function minput_reset () resets the current input context.

** Names of sample programs have prefix "m17n-" instead of single "m".
This is to avoid confiliction of program names included in the other
packages.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.1.0

** The "configure" script now detects Fontconfig, Xft2, and GD
libraries.

If Fontconfig library is found, the library find local font files
(that are to be handled by the Freetype library) by fontconfig, and if
Xft2 library is also found, draw text by Xft.

** Mdevice (new symbol) is recoginized as a key in the argument PLIST
of mframe ().

The value must be Mx (new symbol), Mgd (new symbol), or Mnil.  See the
documentation of mframe () for more detail.

** MDrawControl has a new member `anti_alias'.

If MDrawControl->anti_alias is nonzero, try to draw anti-aliased text
if local fonts are used for that text via Freetype.  If Xft2 library
can be used, the anti-alias processing is done by Xft2's drawing
routine.  Otherwise, the m17n library itself does it by assumming that
the background color is `background' property of a face.

** Modification of face is now automatically refelected to the next
drawing.

So, for instance, an application can change the default face of a
frame after the frame is created.  The sample program "medit" utilize
it now.

** New function mfontset_lookup () reports contents of a fontset.

** New function mplist_deseriaze () parses an M-Text and generates a
plist.

** The functions mfont_name () and mfont_from_name () are now obsolete
(still kept for backward compatibility).  Use mfont_parse_name () and
mfont_unparse_name () instead.

** The sample program "mdump" generates PNG image file instead of PBM.

It now runs only when the m17n library is configured with the Freetype
library and the GD library.


* Changes in the m17n library 1.0

** Released.


* Copyright information

Copyright (C) 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
  National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
  Registration Number H15PRO112

This file is part of the m17n library.

The m17n library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2.1 of
the License, or (at your option) any later version.

The m17n library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Lesser General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License along with the m17n library; if not, write to the Free
Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor,
Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA.

Local Variables:
mode: outline
paragraph-separate: "[ 	]*$"
End:
