Copyright (c) 2007-2008 Cisco Systems, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Overview
========

mpi-selector is a simplistic tool that helps manage having multiple
MPI implementations installed on a single host (or cluster).  It
allows system administrators to set a site-wide default MPI
implementation, but also allows users to selectively override that
site-wide default with their own choice of MPI implementation.

Both selections are optional and independent; system administrators
may choose not to set a site-wide default while users do choose to
their own default (and vice versa).

Much more information is contained in the mpi-selector.1 man page.

Installation
============

mpi-selector is installed with the traditional "configure" / "make"
combination common to many open source projects.

A traditional "configure" script is provided to allow you where to
install mpi-selector.  The main option that you'll want to use is
--prefix, specifying the top directory where mpi-selector and its
files are installed.

  shell$ ./configure --prefix=/where/to/install

Then run "make install" to install (you may need root permissions if
installing into restricted directories):

  shell# make install

This command will install the following files:

  $bindir/mpi-selector
    --> $bindir defaults to "$prefix/bin", unless overridden on
        the "configure" command line
  $mandir/man1/mpi-selector.1
    --> $mandir defaults to "$prefix/man", unless overridden on
        the "configure" command line
  $pkgdatadir/mpi-selector.sh
  $pkgdatadir/mpi-selector.csh
    --> $pkgdatadir defaults to "$prefix/share/mpi-selector", unless
        overridden on the "configure" command line (RPMs will
        typically change this value -- YMMV).

The two files installed in $pkgdatadir are intended for site-wide
shell startup usage.  For example, on RedHat systems, they should be
copied to /etc/profile.d so that all shells will execute them upon
startup.  

These last two files will examine both the site-wide and per user MPI
implementation selection, and if one is set, setup the shell's
environment for it.

Contact
=======

If you need assistance with the mpi-selector package, first read the
mpi-selector(1) man page; it contains a lot more information than is
listed here.

If that still does not answer your question, please send mail to the
OpenFabrics general mailing list (see http://www.openfabrics.org/).
This is a high-volume mailing list, so be sure to put "mpi-selector"
in the subject line somewhere to help ensure that it won't be missed.

Or feel free to contact me directly.

Enjoy!

- Jeff Squyres
  14 Feb 2007


