.TH mpiexec 1 "3/8/2011" " " "MPI"
.SH NAME
mpiexec \-  Run an MPI program 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.fi
.nf
mpiexec args executable pgmargs [ : args executable pgmargs ... ]
.fi

where 
.I args
are command line arguments for 
.I mpiexec
(see below),
.I executable
is the name of an executable MPI program, and 
.I pgmargs
are command line arguments for the executable.  Multiple executables
can be specified by using the colon notation (for MPMD - Multiple Program
Multiple Data applications).

.SH STANDARD PARAMETERS


.PD 0
.TP
.B -n num 
- number of processes
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B -host hostname 
- name of a host (machine, system) on which to run
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B -arch architecture_name 
- name of the computer architecture required
for this executable
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B -wdir working_directory 
- The working directory to use when running the 
executable (set before the executable starts)
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B -path pathlist 
- use this to find the executable
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B -soft list 
- comma separated triplets specifying valid numbers of processes
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B -file name 
- implementation-defined specification file
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B -configfile name 
- file containing specifications of host/program, 
one per line, with # as a comment indicator, e.g., the usual
mpiexec input, but with ":" replaced with a newline.  That is,
the configfile contains lines with 
.I -soft
, 
.I -n
etc.
.PD 1


.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
The following environment variables affect the behavior of 
.I mpiexec
:
.PD 0
.TP
.B MPIEXEC_UNIVERSE_SIZE 
- Sets the maximum number of processes to allow.
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B MPIEXEC_TIMEOUT 
- Maximum running time in seconds.  
.I mpiexec
will
terminate MPI programs that take longer than the value specified by
.I MPIEXEC_TIMEOUT
\&.
This version of 
.I mpiexec
(forker process manager)
sets a default timelimit of 3 minutes (180 seconds) since the forker
process manager is intended for debugging applications.
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B MPIEXEC_PREFIX_DEFAULT 
- If this environment variable is set, output
to standard output is prefixed by the rank in 
.I MPI_COMM_WORLD
of the 
process and output to standard error is prefixed by the rank and the 
text 
.I (err)
; both are followed by an angle bracket (
.I >
).  If
this variable is not set, there is no prefix.
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B MPIEXEC_PREFIX_STDOUT 
- Set the prefix for output from standard output.
This is a string containing text and (optionally) the expression 
.I %d
;
if 
.I %d
is seen, it is replaced by the rank in 
.I MPI_COMM_WORLD
of the 
process.  If there is more than one 
.I MPI_COMM_WORLD
; for example, 
if 
.I MPI_Comm_spawn
is used, the expression 
.I %w
is replaced with a
numeric 
.B world number
, assigned by 
.I mpiexec
\&.
The expression 
.I %%

produces a single percent character.
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B MPIEXEC_PREFIX_STDERR 
- Like 
.I MPIEXEC_PREFIX_STDOUT
, but for output from
standard error.
.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B MPIEXEC_STDIN_DEST 
- Sets the destination process for input from standard in,
by rank in the corresponding 
.I MPI_COMM_WORLD
\&.

.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B MPIEXEC_STDOUTBUF 
- Sets the buffering mode for standard output.  Valid
values are 
.I NONE
(no buffering), 
.I LINE
(buffering by lines), and
.I BLOCK
(buffering by blocks of characters; the size of the block is
implementation defined).  The default is 
.I NONE
\&.

.PD 1
.PD 0
.TP
.B MPIEXEC_STDERRBUF 
- Like 
.I MPIEXEC_STDOUTBUF
, but for standard error.
.PD 1

Note that the 
.I MPIEXEC_PREFIX_xxx
and 
.I MPIEXEC_STDIN_DEST
variables
are not fully implemented.

.SH STARTUP ENVIRONMENT
All of the users environment variables are provided to each of the
created processes.  This is not required by the MPI standard, but
is often very convenient.

.SH RETURN STATUS
.I mpiexec
returns the maximum of the exit status values of all of the
processes created by 
.I mpiexec
\&.


.SH NOTES
A few additional enviroment variables are defined for the use of
developers and in debugging.  These are

.PD 0
.TP
.B MPIEXEC_DEBUG 
- If set, 
.I mpiexec
will write additional information
about the steps that it is taking.
.PD 1


.SH LOCATION
mpiexec.txt
